# TDP_43-Mutaion-Analysis
Probing the impact of disease causing mutations on TDP-43 protein via molecular dynamics simulation aided with machine learning approaches.
Autohor: Abhibhav Sharma; Pinki Dey

The molecular mechanisms leading to the accumulation of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) in central nervous system is a key feature of several common neurological disorders in ageing societies, such as frontotemporal   (FTD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and limbic predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE)1. The TDP-43 protein is highly conserved and plays a significant role in RNA regulation such as splicing, transcriptional regulation, mRNA stabilization2, 3 etc. Moreover, the TDP-43 is a ubiquitously expressed member of the large heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family that shows specific RNA/DNA binding ability by the highly conserved RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) of the proteins4. But during pathological conditions, several post-translational modifications occur in the protein that leads to their cytoplasmic aggregation causing TDP-43 proteinopathies5-7. Infact, ~97% of all the cases of ALS, ~75% of patients with severe AD and ~45% of all the cases of FTDL involve the aggregation of TDP-438, 9. And all the four diseases which are together known as TDP-proteinopathies2, 10 constitute the major cause of dementia in the world and are expected to rise notoriously in the coming years11.

Over the past years, numerous studies were performed to understand the pathological mechanisms underlying TDP-43 and almost all the studies focused on the misfolding8, mislocalization12 and aggregation13-15 of the TDP-43 protein. Several studies were able to depict that the mutation in the C-terminal regions of TDP-43 such as R361S, N345K, Q343R leads to its toxic aggregation in the cytoplasm1, 8, 16-18. Certain mutations in TDP-43 such as A382T, A315T, M337V were also reported to escalate its cytoplasmic mislocalization17, 19. Most of these mutations are introduced as post-translational modifications, the most common being phosphorylation and ubiquitination of the protein20. However, the exact mechanisms underlying the aggregation of TDP-43 remains elusive. One of the prominent hallmarks of TDP-43 induced proteinopathies is marked by its depletion in the nucleus and increased aggregation into cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. And the rate limiting step of this process is the cleavage of TDP-43 and generation of C-terminal fragments by the cysteine proteases, caspase and calpain21, 22. 

The generation of C-terminal fragments, TDP-25 (25kD fragment) and TDP-35 (35kD fragment) by caspase-3 and caspase-7 is the most prominent step for the clearance of TDP-4323. Several experimental studies have also reported significant delay in cell death on blockage of the caspase digestion23-25. Moreover, it is shown that out of the four prominent caspase cleavage consensus sites, three sites lie in the RNA recognition motifs (RRM) of the TDP-43 protein26.  The cleavage at D89-A90 of N-terminal domain (NTD) of TDP-43 generates TDP-35 that is still capable of folding correctly27. But, both the cleavage sites at D169-G170 and D174-C175 of the RRM of TDP-43 generates TDP-25 which lacks the NTD, nuclear localization signal (NLS) and most of RRM1, trapping the protein in the cytoplasm28 and thus enhancing its cytoplasmic aggregation29. Interestingly, certain mutations, particularly D169G in the RRM1 domain is reported to increase the thermal stability of the protein which becomes more accessible to cleavage by caspase-3 resulting in the early onset of diseases such as ALS26. They also showed that the neighbouring I168 residue is also very crucial for protein folding. Recently, mutations in the RRMs are also shown to influence the DNA or RNA binding specificities30 indicating the role of nucleic acid binding in TDP-43 aggregation. However, studies on the effect of disease-causing mutations on the RRM domains of the TDP-43 is still very limited. Given the crucial role played by the disease-causing mutations in the RRM domain in inducing conformational stability, the nucleic acid binding and their role in affecting the cleavage sites remains largely unexplored.

To unmask the effect of these highly crucial disease-causing mutations in RRM domain of TDP43, the in-silico approach of molecular dynamics simulation holds promising aspects as it provides insights at the molecular level by mimicking the physiochemical changes that occur within in the biomolecule when subjected to a specific condition. However, the high dimensional nature of biomolecular simulation data makes it challenging to extract the discriminatory features or set of collective variables (CVs) of the system31. In this case of TDP-43, the CVs that we are interested in are those optimum sets of descriptors that discriminates the different biomolecular states (wild type and mutated) over a specific time scale. 
Recently, machine learning methods are receiving great attention in the biological research domains including sequence structure-function prediction, genomics, and biological imaging32-34. Machine learning models have shown esoteric capabilities of learning the ensemble properties through the MD simulation data and subsequently were able to predict the biomolecular functions35 as well as the optimum set of CVs or important discriminating molecular descriptors such as long-distance interaction36 that govern the biomolecular changes during the trajectory.

In this paper, we perform an extensive structural analysis on the impact of disease-causing mutations and nucleic acid binding in the RRM1 domain of the TDP-43 protein. We address this question by integrating molecular dynamics and machine learning approaches in mainly two ways (i) structural analysis of the wild type and disease-causing mutant proteins bound to nucleic acid by molecular dynamics simulations and (ii) identifying the functionally important regions and biological descriptors of TDP-43 in different mutated states that are crucial in explaining the effect of nucleic acid binding and disease causing mutations in the caspase cleavage sites in RRM motifs of TDP-43 using Machine Learning models.


The Pipeline
(I) The Simulation dataset is first feed to generate the inter residual distance
(II) The empirical analysis is carried out
(III) The machine learning mmodels were then implemented on the filtered inverse dataset to etract features
(IV) The importance profile is generated
(V) The important intercatons were identified

The individual pair wise analysis could be performed by the sepraret machine learning modules 

